mind your decisions i'm preshtalwalkar
solve for real values of x in the
following equation
the quantity x minus 1 over x
raised to the power of one-half plus the
quantity
one minus one over x raised to the power
of one half
is equal to x i thank rookvade for the
suggestion
pause the video if you'd like to give
this problem a try
and when you're ready keep watching to
learn how to solve this problem
we will solve this problem using some
clever substitutions
suppose the first term is equal to a and
the second term is equal to b
the equation then becomes a plus b
is equal to x
we will multiply both sides of this
equation by the quantity
a minus b the left-hand side of the
equation
will then simplify to be a difference of
squares
a squared minus b squared is equal to x
multiplied by the quantity
a minus b we will then simplify the
difference of squares
a squared is equal to x minus one over x
and b squared is equal to one minus one
over x
therefore a squared minus b squared is
equal to
x minus one we will substitute that into
the equation
we will then divide both sides of this
equation by x
x minus 1 all over x is equal to a minus
b
we will flip this equation around for
convenience
we will then simplify the right hand
side of this equation
x minus 1 all over x is equal to 1
minus 1 over x we will then
add these two equations together
notice that the b terms cancel out so we
have two
a is equal to x plus one minus one
over x we then simplify the right hand
side of the equation
notice that x minus one over x is equal
to a
squared so we then have 2a is equal to a
squared plus 1.
we can easily solve this quadratic
equation
we subtract 2a from both sides and then
we factor
we thus have the double root that a is
equal to one
we then recall that a is equal to the
quantity
x minus one over x raised to the power
of one half
we can then solve this equation for x we
square both sides of the equation
and then we will multiply both sides of
this equation by
x this simplifies to be the following
quadratic equation
x squared minus 1 is equal to x
this is a standard equation that we can
solve using brahma goop this quadratic
formula
we get two roots one is the golden ratio
one plus the square root of five all
over two and the other
is the negative reciprocal of the golden
ratio
one minus the square root of five over
two
we can see if either of these roots is a
solution to the original equation
to do that we go back to the original
equation and evaluate each root
first we'll consider the negative root
we can actually see this is not going to
be a possible solution
because the sum of two square roots will
be equal to x
the sum of two square roots should be a
non-negative number and here x is a
negative number
but we'll go ahead and substitute in and
we'll see that this is not a solution to
the original equation
so we can eliminate this possibility we
are left with the other possibility of
the golden ratio
and we can check this is in fact a
solution to the original equation
therefore the solution to the original
equation
is the golden ratio it's quite a divine
answer thanks for making us one of the
best communities on youtube
see you next episode of mind your
decisions where we solve the world's
problems
one video at a time
you